Rootstock Umbrella Network tutorial (hacktivator) (#426)
rsksmart/devportal: docs/05-dev-tools/oracles/umbrellanetwork.md

> The platform combines a decentralized architecture with seamless integration options to deliver reliable data feeds. It is compatible with 12 major blockchains, including Rootstock, Ethereum, BNB Chain, ensuring extensive support for various blockchain projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Umbrella Network is a decentralized oracle service platform providing scalable, secure and customizable real world on-chain data for Web3. It is compatible with Rootstock, and other blockchains including Ethereum, BNB Chain.

Umbrella Network is currently supported on: <Shield title="mainnet" color="orange" />
```

## Requirements

> [foundry](https://dev.rootstock.io/dev-tools/dev-environments/foundry/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Foundry](https://dev.rootstock.io/dev-tools/dev-environments/foundry/)
- [Foundry Starter Kit](https://dev.rootstock.io/developers/quickstart/foundry/)
```

## Umbrella Network Architecture
Umbrella Network is made up of validator nodes that fetch off-chain data and prove that the data is valid and unchanged.<br></br>

> Nodes stake a certain amount of UMB token to act as collateral in case of a malicious actor.<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes stake a certain amount of [UMB token](https://drive.google.com/file/d/13arrbhE9USmU92RxZyrwLOBQwzCRQf5N/view?usp=drive_link) to act as collateral in case of a malicious actor.<br></br>
```

Many independent validator nodes pull high quality data from defined APIs and submit it offchain to Umbrella's layer-2 network.<br></br>

> Several validator nodes are then elected as leaders, which means they are in charge of agreeing on the final value (consensus) of the data to be submitted to the various supported blockchains.<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several validator nodes are then elected as leaders, which means they are in charge of agreeing on the final value (consensus) of the data to be submitted to Rootstock and other supported blockchains.<br></br>
```

> Several validator nodes are then elected as leaders, which means they are in charge of agreeing on the final value (consensus) of the data to be submitted to the various supported blockchains.<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several validator nodes are then elected as leaders, which means they are in charge of agreeing on the final value ([consensus](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/umbrella-network-architecture.html#consensus)) of the data to be submitted to the various supported blockchains.<br></br>
```

Once consensus has been reached, a cryptographic proof is added to the data to prevent tampering.<br></br>

> The data is then broadcast to supported networks and updated in the appropriate smart contracts.<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data is then broadcast to supported networks including Rootstock and updated in the appropriate smart contracts.<br></br>
```

Usually, data from high quality sources has minimal to no deviation. A big difference in one oracle's value from the rest of the values indicates a faulty or malicious validator which then gets their stake slashed.<br></br>

## Read data from Umbrella Network smart contracts using Foundry
There are several smart contracts involved when reading data from Umbrella Network, which we will briefly describe and use:
- Umbrella Registry

> - UmbrellaFeeds

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`UmbrellaFeeds`](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/umb-token-contracts.html#umbrellafeeds-and-chain-smart-contracts)
```

- Reader contracts

> To read data directly, only the first two are used.<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To read data directly, only the Registry and Feeds are utilised.<br></br>
```

In some cases, however, you might want to use another contract as a proxy to read the same data, for which you need to deploy another contract to do that (reader contract).

The actual data is found in the `Umbrella Feeds` smart contract. However, you must first get the address from the `Umbrella Registry` contract.

:::info[Info]
It is recommended to run the commands below on mainnet because
- We are only reading from the contracts, no gas will be used unless you are deploying your own [reader contract](#reader-contracts).

> - Most price feeds are not available on testnet.

Reviewer: List the price feeds available on mainnet for Rootstock: https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/price-feeds.html#mainnets

:::

### Umbrella Registry
This is a smart contract that contains the addresses of other related smart contracts.
We can interact with it using `cast`.<br></br>

> Get the registry contract address for your chosen blockchain [here](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/umb-token-contracts.html#contract-registry)<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the registry contract addresses for Rootstock:

| Rootstock Mainnet | 0x4A28406ECE8fFd7A91789738a5ac15DAc44bFa1b |
| Rootstock Testnet | 0x92010e763d476a732021191562134c488ca92a1f |

```

Open your terminal and run the following command with the appropriate inputs:
```bash
cast interface --chain <CHAIN_ID> <CONTRACT_ADDRESS>
```

This generates an interface file from the contract's ABI, allowing us to look through the available functions and parameters available like below.

```solidity

> mash@debby:~/Desktop/oracle$ cast interface --chain 30 0x4A28406ECE8fFd7A91789738a5ac15DAc44bFa1b

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast interface --chain 30 0x4A28406ECE8fFd7A91789738a5ac15DAc44bFa1b
```

    function importAddresses(bytes32[] memory _names, address[] memory _destinations) external;
    function importContracts(address[] memory _destinations) external;
    function owner() external view returns (address);
    function registry(bytes32) external view returns (address);
    function renounceOwnership() external;
    function requireAndGetAddress(bytes32 name) external view returns (address);
    function stringToBytes32(string memory _string) external pure returns (bytes32 result);
    function transferOwnership(address newOwner) external;
}
```

The `getAddress` function is used to get the address of a specific contract based on the associated key.
In this case, the key to be used is `"UmbrellaFeeds"`.<br></br>
Call this function with `cast`.<br></br>
You will also need the appropriate Rootstock RPC url. Feel free to use testnet or mainnet, reading from the contract does not cost gas.

```bash
cast call <REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS> "getAddress(bytes32)(address)" $(cast --format-bytes32-string "UmbrellaFeeds") --rpc-url <RPC_URL>
```

The output is the address of the `UmbrellaFeeds` smart contract in the next section.
```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0x4A28406ECE8fFd7A91789738a5ac15DAc44bFa1b "getAddress(bytes32)(address)" $(cast --format-bytes32-string "UmbrellaFeeds") --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0x4A28406ECE8fFd7A91789738a5ac15DAc44bFa1b "getAddress(bytes32)(address)" $(cast --format-bytes32-string "UmbrellaFeeds") --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

0xDc823570a5673E4D386242249EAfA086c436AB9c
```

> ### UmbrellaFeeds

Reviewer: Getting Price Feed Data for Your dApp

This contract contains the actual data to be used in the dApp such as the price of RIF to USD.<br></br>

> Check [here](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/price-feeds.html#mainnets) for the list of available price feeds on Rootstock.<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
View the [Price Feeds](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/price-feeds.html#mainnets) for the list of available price feeds on Rootstock.<br></br>
```

> Pick a random one from the list. For this example I will pick `USDRIF-rUSDT`.<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pick a random feed from the list. For this example I will pick `USDRIF-rUSDT`.<br></br>
```

> Get the interface of the contract with `cast` and look at the functions available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get the interface of the contract with `cast` and view the functions available:
```

```bash
cast interface --chain <CHAIN_ID> <CONTRACT_ADDRESS>
```

```solidity

> mash@debby:~$ cast interface --chain 30 0xDc823570a5673E4D386242249EAfA086c436AB9c

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast interface --chain 30 0xDc823570a5673E4D386242249EAfA086c436AB9c
```

    function getPriceTimestamp(bytes32 _key) external view returns (uint128 price, uint32 timestamp);
    function getPriceTimestampHeartbeat(bytes32 _key)
        external
        view
        returns (uint128 price, uint32 timestamp, uint24 heartbeat);
    function hashData(bytes32[] memory _priceKeys, IUmbrellaFeeds.PriceData[] memory _priceDatas)
        external
        view
        returns (bytes32);
    function prices(bytes32 _key) external view returns (IUmbrellaFeeds.PriceData memory data);
    function recoverSigner(bytes32 _hash, uint8 _v, bytes32 _r, bytes32 _s) external pure returns (address);
    function update(
        bytes32[] memory _priceKeys,
        IUmbrellaFeeds.PriceData[] memory _priceDatas,
        IUmbrellaFeeds.Signature[] memory _signatures
    ) external;
    function verifySignatures(bytes32 _hash, IUmbrellaFeeds.Signature[] memory _signatures) external view;
}
```

Note the struct `PriceData` above. That is the format of the expected value.
```solidity
struct PriceData {
   uint8 data;
   uint24 heartbeat;
   uint32 timestamp;
   uint128 price;
}
```

> 

Reviewer: #### Get Price Data by Name

Now we can use the `getPriceDataByName` method to get the desired currency pair on the terminal with `cast`.
```bash
cast call <CONTRACT_ADDRESS> "getPriceDataByName(string) returns (uint8,uint24,uint32,uint128)" "USDRIF-rUSDT" --rpc-url <ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL>
```

Extract the price from the output (the fourth variable in the struct).

```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0xDc823570a5673E4D386242249EAfA086c436AB9c "getPriceDataByName(string) returns (uint8,uint24,uint32,uint128)" "USDRIF-rUSDT" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0xDc823570a5673E4D386242249EAfA086c436AB9c "getPriceDataByName(string) returns (uint8,uint24,uint32,uint128)" "USDRIF-rUSDT" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

> 

Reviewer: The response should look like this:

```

0
86400 [8.64e4]
1756676285 [1.756e9]
98785892 [9.878e7] //price
```

> 

Reviewer: #### Read Decimal Numbers From Contract

Finally, read the number of decimals from the contract with this function `function DECIMALS() external view returns (uint8);`
```bash
cast call <CONTRACT_ADDRESS> "DECIMALS() returns (uint8)" --rpc-url <ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL>
```

```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0xDc823570a5673E4D386242249EAfA086c436AB9c "DECIMALS() returns (uint8)" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0xDc823570a5673E4D386242249EAfA086c436AB9c "DECIMALS() returns (uint8)" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

> 

Reviewer: Response:

```

8
```

The pair `USDRIF-rUSDT` therefore has the value `98785892/10^8` = `0.98785892` (0.98785892 USDRIF for every rUSDT)

### Reader Contracts
A reader contract is a smart contract designed to read from another contract, usually abstracting away a few steps such as converting the data to a more suitable format.

Go to the [registry contract's](#umbrella-registry) `getAddress` function and pass in `"UmbrellaFeedsReaderFactory"` as the parameter.

```bash
cast call <REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS> "getAddress(bytes32)(address)" $(cast --format-bytes32-string "UmbrellaFeedsReaderFactory") --rpc-url <ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL>
```

The output is the address of the `ReaderFactory` contract. 

```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0x4A28406ECE8fFd7A91789738a5ac15DAc44bFa1b "getAddress(bytes32)(address)" $(cast --format-bytes32-string "UmbrellaFeedsReaderFactory") --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0x4A28406ECE8fFd7A91789738a5ac15DAc44bFa1b "getAddress(bytes32)(address)" $(cast --format-bytes32-string "UmbrellaFeedsReaderFactory") --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

0xD12EbD0892BC812218688Dcd90DD6FE160aE092A
```

Get the interface of the factory contract to look at the available functions
```bash
cast interface --chain <ROOTSTOCK_CHAIN_ID> <READER_FACTORY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS>
```

```solidity

> mash@debby:~$ cast interface --chain 30 0xD12EbD0892BC812218688Dcd90DD6FE160aE092A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast interface --chain 30 0xD12EbD0892BC812218688Dcd90DD6FE160aE092A
```

// SPDX-License-Identifier: UNLICENSED
pragma solidity ^0.8.4;

interface UmbrellaFeedsReaderFactory {
    error EmptyAddress();

    event NewUmbrellaFeedsReader(address indexed umbrellaFeedsReader, string feedName);

    function REGISTRY() external view returns (address);
    function deploy(string memory _feedName) external returns (address reader);
    function deployed(string memory _feedName) external view returns (address);
    function getName() external pure returns (bytes32);
    function hash(string memory _feedName) external pure returns (bytes32);
    function readers(bytes32) external view returns (address);
}
```

The `deploy` function creates a new reader contract associated with a specific price pair.<br></br>
`deployed` gives the address of an already deployed reader contract for the provided currency pair.

```bash
cast call <READER_FACTORY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS> "deployed(string) returns (address)" <CURRENCY_PAIR> --rpc-url <ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL>
```

> A zero address indicates no reader contract is present for RIF-rUSDT. In this case, you can deploy your own reader using instructions on the Umbrella docs [here](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/integration-details.html#via-reader).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A zero address indicates no reader contract is present for RIF-rUSDT. In this case, you can deploy your own reader using instructions on the [Umbrella docs](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/integration-details.html#via-reader).
```

```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0xD12EbD0892BC812218688Dcd90DD6FE160aE092A "deployed(string) returns (address)" "RIF-rUSDT" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0xD12EbD0892BC812218688Dcd90DD6FE160aE092A "deployed(string) returns (address)" "RIF-rUSDT" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```

Any other valid address as the output is the contract we need.
```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0xD12EbD0892BC812218688Dcd90DD6FE160aE092A "deployed(string) returns (address)" "SOV-WRBTC" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0xD12EbD0892BC812218688Dcd90DD6FE160aE092A "deployed(string) returns (address)" "SOV-WRBTC" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

0xD19C320012060fbF9A91E86456941D965bB51C90
```
<br></br>
Check the interface of the reader contract
```solidity

> mash@debby:~$ cast interface --chain 30 0xD19C320012060fbF9A91E86456941D965bB51C90

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast interface --chain 30 0xD19C320012060fbF9A91E86456941D965bB51C90
```

// SPDX-License-Identifier: UNLICENSED
pragma solidity ^0.8.4;

library IUmbrellaFeeds {
    struct PriceData {
        uint8 data;
        uint24 heartbeat;
        uint32 timestamp;
        uint128 price;
    }
}

interface UmbrellaFeedsReader {
    error EmptyAddress();
    error FeedNotExist();

    function KEY() external view returns (bytes32);
    function REGISTRY() external view returns (address);
    function UMBRELLA_FEEDS() external view returns (address);
    function decimals() external view returns (uint8);
    function description() external view returns (string memory);
    function getPriceData() external view returns (IUmbrellaFeeds.PriceData memory priceData);
    function getPriceDataRaw() external view returns (IUmbrellaFeeds.PriceData memory priceData);
    function latestRoundData() external view returns (uint80, int256 answer, uint256, uint256 updatedAt, uint80);
}
```

Use `decimals()` to get the number of decimals to go with the output
```bash
cast call <READER_ADDRESS> "decimals() returns (uint8)" --rpc-url <ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL>
```

```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0xD19C320012060fbF9A91E86456941D965bB51C90 "decimals() returns (uint8)" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0xD19C320012060fbF9A91E86456941D965bB51C90 "decimals() returns (uint8)" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

8
```

Use `getPriceData()` to get the resulting price struct
```bash
cast call <READER_CONTRACT_ADDRESS> "getPriceData() returns (uint8,uint24,uint32,uint128)" --rpc-url <ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL>

```

```bash

> mash@debby:~$ cast call 0xD19C320012060fbF9A91E86456941D965bB51C90 "getPriceData() returns (uint8,uint24,uint32,uint128)" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ cast call 0xD19C320012060fbF9A91E86456941D965bB51C90 "getPriceData() returns (uint8,uint24,uint32,uint128)" --rpc-url https://public-node.rsk.co
```

0
86400 [8.64e4]
1756916582 [1.756e9]
891641407696 [8.916e11] //price
```

## Read from a React frontend with viem
Create a react app with the following command
```bash
yarn create vite
```

```bash

> mash@debby:~/Desktop$ yarn create vite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ yarn create vite
```

Reviewer: Add updated node version in the prerequisites

```
yarn create vite
yarn create v1.22.22
[1/4] 🔍  Resolving packages...
[2/4] 🚚  Fetching packages...
error create-vite@8.0.2: The engine "node" is incompatible with this module. Expected version "^20.19.0 || >=22.12.0". Got "20.11.1"
error Found incompatible module.
info Visit https://yarnpkg.com/en/docs/cli/create for documentation about this command.
owanate@Owanates-MacBook-Pro react-vite % node -v

v20.11.1

```

yarn create v1.22.22
[1/4] Resolving packages...
[2/4] Fetching packages...
[3/4] Linking dependencies...
[4/4] Building fresh packages...
success Installed "create-vite@8.0.2" with binaries:
      - create-vite
      - cva
[##] 2/2│
◇  Project name:
│  umb-demo
│
◇  Select a framework:
│  React
│
◇  Select a variant:
│  TypeScript
│
◇  Use rolldown-vite (Experimental)?:
│  No
│
◇  Install with yarn and start now?
│  Yes
│
◇  Scaffolding project in /home/mash/Desktop/umb-demo...
│
◇  Installing dependencies with yarn...
yarn install v1.22.22
info No lockfile found.
[1/4] Resolving packages...
[2/4] Fetching packages...
info There appears to be trouble with your network connection. Retrying...
[3/4] Linking dependencies...
[4/4] Building fresh packages...
success Saved lockfile.
Done in 294.56s.
│
◇  Starting dev server...
yarn run v1.22.22
$ vite

  VITE v7.1.12  ready in 193 ms

  ➜  Local:   http://localhost:5173/
  ➜  Network: use --host to expose
  ➜  press h + enter to show help
```

> Enter the newly created folder, go to `src/App.tsx` and delete most of the starter content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the newly created folder in code editor, go to `src/App.tsx` and delete most of the starter content
```

```typescript
function App() {

  return (
    <>
      <h1>Umbrella Network Price Feeds</h1>
    </>
  )
}

export default App
```

Install `viem`, this will be used to interact with the smart contracts from the frontend.
```bash
yarn add viem
```

> Check the currency pairs available on Rootstock [here](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/price-feeds.html#mainnets).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
View the [currency pairs available on Rootstock](https://umbrella-network.github.io/technical-documentation/umbrella-network/docs/price-feeds.html#mainnets).
```

These will be passed as options to the component of the app used to switch between available currencies.<br></br>

> Get the ABIs of the smart contracts which we will interact with (Registry contract, UmbrellaFeeds contract) on a supported block explorer of your choice such as [Blockscout](https://dev.rootstock.io/dev-tools/explorers/blockscout/).<br></br>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Get the ABIs of the smart contracts which we will interact with (Registry contract, UmbrellaFeeds contract) on any supported block explorer, such as [Blockscout](https://dev.rootstock.io/dev-tools/explorers/blockscout/).<br></br>
```

> A minimal ABI has been provided for the example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A minimal ABI has been provided for this example.
```

          { name: 'price', type: 'uint128' },
        ],
        name: 'data',
        type: 'tuple',
      },
    ],
    stateMutability: 'view',
    type: 'function',
  },
]

const PRICE_FEEDS = [
  {
    name: 'WRBTC-rUSDT',
    decimals: 8,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
  {
    name: 'BITP-WRBTC',
    decimals: 8,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
  {
    name: 'SOV-WRBTC',
    decimals: 18,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
  {
    name: 'RIF-rUSDT',
    decimals: 8,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
  {
    name: 'USDRIF-rUSDT',
    decimals: 8,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
  {
    name: 'DOC-rUSDT',
    decimals: 8,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
  {
    name: 'rUSDT-DOC',
    decimals: 8,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
  {
    name: 'RIFPro-USD',
    decimals: 8,
    deviation: '0.5%',
    heartbeat: '1 day',
  },
]

const client = createPublicClient({
  chain: rootstock,
  transport: http(ROOTSTOCK_RPC_URL),
})

function App() {

  return (
    <>
      <h1>Umbrella Network Price Feeds</h1>
    </>
  )
}

export default App
```

> Use the various functions provided by viem to interact with the contracts.<br></br>

Reviewer: Where are these functions? In the code example or somewhere else?

Create the dropdown select for the currency pairs and a button to fetch the specific pair.<br></br>

> Below is the complete component with some utility functions that you can paste and run.<br></br>

Reviewer: #### Complete Demo Code

              <dd>{selectedFeed.decimals}</dd>
              <dt>Deviation Threshold:</dt>
              <dd>{selectedFeed.deviation}</dd>
              <dt>Expected Heartbeat:</dt>
              <dd>{selectedFeed.heartbeat}</dd>
            </dl>
          </section>

          <button
            onClick={fetchPriceData}
            disabled={loading}
          >
            {loading ? (
              <>
                <span>⟳</span>
                Fetching...
              </>
            ) : (
              'Fetch Price Data'
            )}
          </button>
        </article>

        {error && (
          <aside>
            <p><strong>Error:</strong> {error}</p>
          </aside>
        )}

        {priceData && !error && (
          <article>
            <header>
              <h2>Current Price</h2>
              <p><strong>{priceData.price}</strong></p>
            </header>

            <section>
              <dl>
                <dt>Last Updated</dt>
                <dd>{priceData.timestamp}</dd>
              </dl>
            </section>
          </article>
        )}
      </section>
    </main>
  )
}

export default App
```

> <div align="center"><img width="100%" src="/img/tools/oracles/umbrella/demo_dapp.png" alt="Demo dApp with Umbrella Network"/></div>

Reviewer: Is this code block useful here? Because it's not working.

Add a new section for troubleshooting and common mistakes like the node version, and any other issues a dev may encounter.

Author: > Is this code block useful here? Because it's not working.

It contains the image of the demo dApp. works locally for me and on the preview link, strange :thinking:

Reviewer: Cool, no worries its a minor thing
